### AUTHOR'S FOREWORD

I should start by admitting something you've probably already figured out: Bland Pseudonym is not my actual legal name. Really. Not that I've anything against my name, but when dealing with a topic as dangerous as poison ivy I would prefer to maintain a low profile. If you are wondering why, I invite you to reflect for a moment on the fact that my parents did not name me "Sue Me". I never once considered having the words "Sue Me" tattooed on my forehead. Poison ivy slaying involves risks; I willingly accept the risks associated with my activities, but those risks pale in comparison to the risks of lawsuits. Funny thing about lawsuits and nuclear war: even if you win, you lose. No thank you. I'd rather remain anonymous. There's always a danger when writing about doing something dangerous: not everyone is a critical thinker while they're reading. Consider a hypothetical example: suppose you stumbled upon a document titled How to Jump out of an Airplane Without a Parachute and Survive. The author then tells stories about how he has jumped out of a variety of different airplanes repeatedly and never once had to use a parachute. He tells the stories in enough detail that you are convinced he is speaking from personal experience. He then goes on to teach you standard paratrooper training points about how to perform a "Parachute Landing Fall". When properly done, this 5 point technique will dissipate the impact of the fall and allow you to survive a major fall uninjured. Suppose you then search Google and get verification that this is a legitimate technique. So you're convinced. Suppose you decide this is something worth trying. Which is a real shame, because there's something that the author failed to mention: All those times he jumped out of an airplane without a parachute, the plane was on the ground and stationary. The author didn't include that detail because he considered it so blindingly obvious that he wouldn't have to. But suppose for you, he did have to. And so suppose splat. Okay, you can stop supposing now.

All of which is to say that I urge you to think critically about what you are reading. Don't just do something as risky as poison ivy slaying just because you read one document. Consult other sources, get the best advice you can, and proceed cautiously. I'm giving you honest information from personal experience here, and I'm doing my best to not leave anything out; still, I'm only human and I don't know what my blind spots are. I've got a family to feed, and I'd prefer not to paint a target on my back. (Some people reading this may know who I am, but please don't spread it around. I don't need that kind of fame.) Despite my desire for anonymity, a bit of personal background is in order here: Assisting with poison ivy eradication was my first job; I started when I was three year's old. My parents wanted to move to a town that had a better school district than the one they were living in, but they were not finding anything they could afford. Eventually, though, they found a rental property that was just about perfect for them. It had one major problem: it was covered in poison ivy. As Dad described it, "If it was green, it was poison ivy." And so he started working at removing it. He had me accompany him and he gave me a responsibility: I was his poison ivy spotter. He taught me to recognize poison ivy (a good idea for any kid, but especially one living where we did). He then asked me to point out any poison ivy he missed. I'm sure he just wanted to spend time with me and to give Mom a break, but (according to him later) I started getting good at it. I was genuinely spotting some very small and hard to spot seedlings. For my part, I considered it a fun game. My dad's encouragement and gratitude was a big help too. Mainly, though, I had a sense that I was accomplishing something worthwhile. I was hooked.

My dad succeeded in keeping poison ivy under control at our house for decades. The first few years were hard and time consuming. Soon, though, it became a minor chore. He eventually helped out taming poison ivy in the surrounding area as well. I knew firsthand that what he was doing was actually effective. Years later, after I had a family of my own, I moved to a house at an ideal location with a big poison ivy problem; now it's my turn. My dad reviewed the process with me, and I got to work. After the first year, I had made visible progress but I still had big problem. After the second year it was obvious I had it on the run. A few years later, and I was able to consider it under control. Decades later, I find that I can just go over the property about once a year and get rid of any fresh seedling. It's not extinct, but it's not a problem. Like my dad, I found opportunities to help others by assisting them in taming their own poison ivy problems. There are a couple of Christian camps locally that I have also been able to help out. I don't do it for profit, but I am pleased to be able to accomplish something worthwhile. I'm still hooked. At some point it occurred to me that it might be nice to set down on paper (or on .pdf) my instructions and advice on the subject of poison ivy eradication. I'm not an obvious person to do so; I'm neither a botanist nor an environmentalist. Neither was my Dad. I've had no formal training on the subject, and I've never really done any serious academic research on it. I've never made any money off poison ivy removal. My sole credential as a poison ivy slayer is experience. I've gotten some impressive results (if I do say so myself), just like my father before me. If I can pass on some experience that might help others get similarly impressive results, wonderful.

This is intended to be a personal reflection. As you may have noticed, this document is sort of turning into my memoir. I get too few opportunities to ramble, so I'm taking advantage of this one. You can listen in or tune me out, your choice.
