### THE BASICS

Poison ivy is a plant found throughout the eastern United States and Canada. It is (I'm told) found elsewhere as well, but I don't go there so that's your problem not mine. This plant produces an oily set of compounds known collectively as urushiol. The sap of this plant is loaded with the stuff. If you touch the leaves of this plant and get this oily compound on your skin, it is quickly absorbed and produces a painful itchy rash that lasts many days. You can also get this compound on you if you break or cut the stem (technically the aerial root). It's even worse if you ingest it or inhale the smoke from burning it. Not everyone reacts to poison ivy. Some people will not react at all when exposed to poison ivy. Most people do, and some react very badly. If you are one of the lucky few who don't, it is best still to minimize your exposure. Poison ivy is a sensitizer, so you might develop a reaction over time and over repeated exposures. I never got it until I was in my late twenties, then I did. Nothing ever happens until it happens for the first time. Be warned. Don't overreact to the first word in the name of this plant: poison ivy is not in the same category as anthrax or botulism. Urushiol won't kill you; it will just suck all the joy out of your life for a few days. (I am told there are very rare fatalities; please consult internet rumors and the legal department for more details.)

Then again, don't underestimate the negative effects of poison ivy. Having a painful rash affects your behavior and your attitude. You find poison ivy outside in the wild; there's a big wide wonderful world outside that is just waiting to be enjoyed, and anything that interferes with that enjoyment is a serious problem. You go out hiking (or even just playing in the backyard), you run into poison ivy and get a rash, you decide it wasn't that much fun after all, and you decide instead to go inside and play video games. Pretty soon everyone is inside playing videogames, and what kind of a world would you get? Oh yeah, the world we have right now. Now I enjoy a good video game every so often, but I know from personal experience that getting out in nature regularly is good for my own mental health. So poison ivy acts as a nudge in the wrong direction; consider what would happen if that direction was reversed. I mean, just imagine what would happen if videogame controllers were altered to be able to give you a skin rash that sucked all the joy out of life for a few days.

Okay, I just imagined it. Oh man. If I were a mad scientist I would totally invent that and make it clear to everyone that I had it and was prepared to use it. Talk about power. The nations of the world would tremble at the very thought of the horrors I could unleash upon humanity. They would fall all over themselves in a mad rush to obey my merest whim, lest I carry through with my implied threat. And if I did have to drop the bomb, what then? People would decide that first person shooter games were really not worth it, so instead they would find a creek somewhere and catch salamanders and crawdads, and the world would be a better place as a result. So: global domination, with a side of altruism; what's not to love? ... Okay, deep breath. I'm back. Don't mind me; I just get that way sometimes. It's a good thing I'm not a mad scientist. Yet.

For the record: I don't hate poison ivy. The poison ivy plant is a native species in this area, so it has every right to be a part of this environment (unlike some other ivy plants I could name, and yes, I'm looking at you kudzu.) When I go to a national park, I will sometimes spot poison ivy vines that I'm pretty sure are older than I am; but since it is not bothering anyone there, I smile and walk on. I also smile when I see poison ivy grow where nothing else would be able to (on sand dunes at a beach, for example.) The biosphere would be a poorer place indeed if this plant went extinct.

Even urushiol has an upside. I am told that the Japanese use the urushiol from a related plant to produce a particularly strong and beautiful lacquer. (So wait a minute. Somebody talks the toxin from poison ivy, coats it on pots etc. and puts it in people's houses, and persuade everyone that this is a good thing? Wow, I thought I was a mad scientist wannabe, but even I never dreamed up a scheme like that. Bravo.)

Therefore, my goal is to keep the poison ivy plant under control and away from where people are likely to encounter it. I also want to be able to provide others with what they need to help with this effort. This document is written to that end.
