### RECOGNISING POISON IVY

For starters, consider the old saying "Leaves of three, let it be." That's a good place to start. Just take a look at this picture:

Note the three leaflets. Note the "T" shaped connection between them; it is short at the top but long extending to the middle leaflet. Note also that the leaflets are all pointed at the end. Beyond that, the appearance of a poison ivy leaf can vary considerably. Its edges may be jagged or smooth. It may or may not have a shiny appearance. Its color and size may vary considerably. There might be regional differences, but what I've noticed is that there can be different appearances within the same region. So to find out the possible appearances in your area, go out, find some poison ivy plants, and study their appearances. So, okay, how do you spot a poison ivy plant if you can't rely on the appearance of the leaves? It is actually easier to spot a mature poison ivy plant by looking at its stem (or, to be technical, aerial roots). Look for a root growing on the side of a tree. It won't be wound around the tree; it will grow more or less straight up. Note that the root will have a hairy appearance. Here's a good example:

Again, the appearance can vary, but the appearance of the root is more constant than the appearance of the leaves. Note that there are some other types of vines that also have similar aerial roots. The Virginia creeper, for example, has hairy aerial roots (although the "hairs" are generally thicker and longer). So look for the combination of leaves of three coming off a hairy aerial root. That combination pretty much guarantees that it is poison ivy. If you want further confirmation, look for round white or green berries at the end of the branches:

Depending on the season or the age of the plant, you might not see them; if you do, though, then it is confirmed to be definitely poison ivy. Once you spot one, look around you; you will probably spot very similar ones in the surrounding area with very similar leaves. No coincidence, that; those are its progeny. Keep track of their appearance; you will be seeing more of them all over the place in your region.

By the way, I have my own version of that old saying: "Leaves of three, let them be. Unless you're me, if so - yippee!". Once you get used to spotting actual poison ivy in your area, it is a good idea to start familiarizing yourself with the local poison ivy mimics. Not everything with leaves of three is toxic. The obvious example: "Leaves of three, straw-bear-ree". (Not a common saying, but perhaps it should be.) The strawberry plant has leaves with three leaflets on them, although the leaflets are not pointed. There are varieties of other plants in my area that have leaves of three; most are either herbaceous or otherwise identifiable as not poison ivy. I've found it useful to identify common mimics at a glance; it helps cut down on the plant equivalent of a wild goose chase.

Here’s a quick example of a mimic:

I did a Google search on this picture, and Google said it was likely poison ivy. Shortly after I took this picture, I picked these leaves and rubbed them vigorously on my upper arm. I never got any rash, so I can be confident a week later that it was not poison ivy. (I point and laugh at Google here.) I also noted that the leaf arrangement was opposite, not alternate (like poison ivy). The plant was also shrubby, not viney. I was quite certain it was not poison ivy before I tested it on myself. I would not recommend self-testing; still, it is a great way of convincing others that you are confident you know what you’re doing. Be warned: mistakes of this nature can be rather embarrassing (and worse!)

I try to avoid killing mimics. Sometimes I do anyway when I'm not absolutely sure it’s a mimic. Sometimes I do when I'm trying to impress the people I'm doing it for and I don't want them to think I missed one. And sometimes I do when I'm just in a bad mood. There's a cautionary tale there somewhere. Don't pretend to be something that people want to kill, because sometimes people are in a bad mood.

Just to give you practice at spotting poison ivy, here are a few pictures that have poison ivy plants in them. How long does it take to spot you to spot them? (Answer key at the back of this document):
