### WHAT A WELL-DRESSED HERO WEARS

Obviously, you won't be dressed just like someone else going out in the woods. You're dressed to kill. Literally, in this case. You are going to be depending on your clothing as the last line of defense against urushiol. How you dress is up to you; you want to be comfortable with your choice, though. I have nothing against the disposable Tyvek chemical workers garments per se; I just consider them hot and impractical. Then again, dressing up in one of those is a great way of being inconspicuous and blending in. Me? I generally wear good denim pants with reasonably thick socks. I used to wear old sneakers that I set aside specifically for poison ivy; recently, though, I've been forgetting to switch from my ordinary sneakers and so far, they haven't contaminated me. I wear a long- sleeved baseball shirt with a flannel overshirt if the weather is at all cold. I wear leather work gloves when I need to, but generally keep them in my back pocket. Most of the time when I've gotten a poison ivy rash it has been on my wrists, so I've taken to cutting the end off an old sock and wearing the sock over my wrists.

A word about clothing: if you are going to do your job effectively, you will eventually need to walk through a patch of poison ivy plants. Try to avoid contact, but don't obsess; you eventually need to decide to just plow through it. As far as I can tell, I've never gotten poison ivy through blue jeans. Don't forget to accessorize. I wear a washable hat to protect from sunlight, rain, and ticks. Sunscreen and bug spray are both in order. I generally wear a lightweight backpack with a pocket to keep a disposable water bottle in. (As you will recall, you will be wearing long- sleeves and long pants today; you will get hot, so remember to stay hydrated.) The backpack is also a good place to keep an umbrella (to ensure that it won't rain), a camera (we'll talk about that one later), and possibly lunch (yum). The straps of the backpack are also a convenient place to hold your lopping shears as long as you can manage not to stab yourself in the armpit with it. One last thing and this is important: put an unsharpened pencil in your back pocket, eraser side down. Murphy's Law says that right when you are in the middle of a major operation, your forehead will itch furiously. You will be tempted unthinkingly to scratch your forehead with your gloves. That's kind of an embarrassing place to get a poison ivy rash. Instead, grab the pencil with your gloved hand, scratch your forehead with the eraser, and put it back in your pocket.

Be sure there is an empty washing machine available when you are done. As soon as you are through for the day, wash your clothes and take a shower. The shower isn't really to deal with contact with poison ivy plants (that ship has already sailed) but rather to deal with your probably inevitable contact with contaminated clothing as you take it off. Besides, getting a shower is seldom a bad idea. Just remember: cleanliness is next to Godliness, but don't bother me about it until I get number one down pat.

