### YOUR WEAPONS

When I go out killing poison ivy, I use three weapons: a good lopping shears, a bow saw that is large enough to carry over my shoulder, and a sprayer of chemical herbicide. Lopping shears have the advantage over handheld pruning shears in that your hands stay further away from what you are cutting. You want bypass shears that are large enough to cut a vine 1 inch in diameter. You want handles long enough to get good leverage but not so long that they will be cumbersome to carry around in the woods. It helps if the handles are brightly colored (I like yellow), because you will eventually need to set it down and you want to be able to find it again quickly. A bow saw is good for cutting anything larger than 1 inch or so. It does have the disadvantage that it will generate urushiol-soaked sawdust (so be careful and upwind if possible while you are using it). This disadvantage is easily counterbalanced by the emotional advantage of the sheer joy of watching that plant ripped apart violently. (Okay, maybe that's just me.) Your saw doesn't have to be as sturdy as a saw you would use to cut down a tree. After all, vine wood is much weaker and softer than tree wood. (That one is even in the Bible; see Ezekiel 15.) And then there's chemical herbicide. Yes, I use it on my own property. I always ask before I use it for someone else. There are people who are opposed to the use of chemical herbicides, and I will respect their wishes. Really, the saw and lopper are your primary weapons; you can really get most poison ivy problems under control without a chemical herbicide. For my part, I am not convinced that there is much risk of harm associated with chemical herbicides when properly used with reasonable attention to safety. If you are concerned, though, don't use them.

I know some people use agricultural strength vinegar mixed with salt and dish detergent. (Be sure to use agricultural strength vinegar; regular vinegar is ineffective and apple cider vinegar bestows immortality and that's the last thing you want a poison ivy plant to get.) Just keep in mind that agricultural strength vinegar is actually quite a dangerous chemical, even though it is considered non-toxic when diluted. Remember, water in sufficient quantities is actually very dangerous; it's called drowning. I’m not posting a recipe here; you can ask your rectangle of all knowledge and see what it says. I have had limited but definite success with a recipe I got off the Internet. Whether or not it was more effective or safer than a commercial herbicide I leave for others to answer, but I can resist commenting on it: Herbicides are designed to block a particular enzyme that is only found in plants. Agricultural vinegar is used because it kills everything it touches, with salt and detergent added to enhance its ability to achieve total destruction. It’s kind of like having to shut down a computer; you can turn it off by pressing the right switch, or you can take a sledgehammer to it and not worry particularly about aiming (and accept that the table it is on will also be destroyed.) Both work, but I know which one I’d rather clean up after.

One method I've seen advocated but I don't use: yanking the plant up by the roots. It probably is quite effective against young plants, but I doubt it will be effective against an established plant with lots of runners. I’ve never tried, and I’ve never found that I’ve needed to try. My main objection to yanking is that it is intentionally contaminating your gloves. Personal protection equipment should always be protection of last resort; a bulletproof vest does not make you Superman. There’s a reason why rugby has far fewer injuries than football; I suspect the reliance on protective equipment is somehow involved. If you choose to yank, though, please be very careful (and find a different source of advice for doing it, since I don't have experience here).

I'm sure there are other effective methods for killing poison ivy, but I've never had to resort to them. I have at times been tempted to just cover up a patch of poison ivy with a large cardboard box or a piece of plywood. I've also been tempted to have a goat eat the stuff. (Goats are downright cute, so any excuse to get a goat has to be a good one.) There's a drawback to any method that is not specifically targeting poison ivy, which I will discuss later. Note also that I would strongly caution against the use of power saws, drills, line trimmers, or lawn mowers; these have the effect of spreading urushiol over a wide area (not a good idea).

One last thing to remember: fire and poison ivy don't mix. You don't want to vaporize urushiol. Or if you want to, you shouldn't. That's just nasty.
