### FIRST OBJECTIVE: REPRODUCING VINES

You need to be ready to play a long game. This is not going to be a quick fix. You might not see much in the way of results the first year, but don't give up. Getting rid of all of the established plants can take a couple years. After that, all that is necessary is to go over the property once a year and get rid of any new seedlings. Think of it as mowing the grass, only you only have to do it once a year. That's the goal. Ready to start heading there? Good. I'm going to presume at this point that you know basic woodsmanship. There are other dangers in the woods besides poison ivy. Can you spot a hornet's nest? How about a yellow jacket's nest? Do you know what the poisonous snakes in your area look like? Do you know how not to look like a deer during deer hunting season? Can you be careful not to step into an old woodchuck hole that has gotten covered with leaves? (Why did I bring that one up? Don't ask.) If you think you need help, consider going with someone who knows their way in the woods better than you do. Even if you don't think you need help, consider going with someone who knows their way in the woods better than you do. They're usually fun people to be around anyway. The alternative is to watch *Ernest Goes to Camp* and remember never to do this to a family of badgers.

Now that you're out in the woods, the first step is to confirm the presence of poison ivy. If you don't see any seedlings, congratulations (but be sure to check again next year.) If you do see seedlings, start looking for established plants. Then start looking for strongholds (areas where poison ivy is the dominant if not the only plant.) Once you've found a stronghold, look up. Chances are you will see a reproducing vine on a tree. Occasionally you will find shrubs with berries, but that's rarer. In any case, if you eliminate the source of new seedlings, your major problem will be solved.

(Quick aside: _The Lord of the Rings_ is a 1200-page story about a ring getting dropped in a volcano. The actual ring drop is described in a few lines. This handbook is not _The Lord of the Rings_ but the whole point is killing the reproducing vine. The rest is just clean-up. With that having been said, let's drop that ring....)

Here is a reproducing vine on a tree that is about to be cut. There are no branches in the way here, but if there were, I would carefully remove them with lopping shears. I find a spot that stands out well from the tree at approximately chest height. I will then use my bow saw to cut most of the way through the vine. I will then make another cut about 1-2 inches up (or down) from my first cut. I will then cut all the way through but I will be very careful not to cut into the tree bark. I will then finish that first cut. Using the end of the saw, I will then push out a small section of this vine. If it doesn't come out neatly, I can usually pry it out with the open blade of my lopping shears. If absolutely necessary, I can usually slip my bow saw blade between the section and the tree trunk (And that's it. The ring is down. Your real problem is now gone. Everything after this is just scouring the Shire.)

Why remove the whole section instead of just relying on a single cut? Two reasons: 

1) There is great practical value in having a gap in the vine that is visible from far away. You are likely to be walking through this area again next year, and it is helpful to be able to tell at a glance that this is a vine that you have already dealt with. Anyone else will also be able to tell at a glance that this vine is no longer a problem. 
2) I'll get to in the next section.

Why chest high? In a word, convenience. You are going to be working hard today, and you want your job to be as convenient as possible. Some might worry that the remaining vine will lead to new growth, but I've never seen that happen. If you want to bend over and cut it right at ground level, go right ahead. Just remember to also cut out a section chest high so you'll actually notice it next time you look at this tree.

I usually let the section of vine that I just remove stay where it lands. It's covered in urushiol, but so is the rest of the area you're standing in. If you are at all worried that somebody will find that section and keep it, you could always bag it up and throw it in the trash somewhere. Once I've cut a section out of that vine, I look the tree over for any additional vines. Any other reproducing vines can be dispatched the same way with your bow saw. Smaller, non- reproducing vines (that will very soon become reproducing vines) can be given similar treatment with lopping shears. Just remember to cut a 1-2 inch section out if it so you will know at a glance that it has been dealt with. Once you're done with this tree, on to the next. I've never been to a property that had only one reproducing vine, so you've still got work to do. And, yes, you are walking away from the tree at that point. If you see it the next day, the leaves of the vine will look distinctly wilted. A few days later and the leaves will be dead and dropping off. You might want to warn people not to play in the dead leaves, but other than that, just let nature take its course. If there are any ripe berries on the vine, they will drop off into the soil below. Bummer, but it isn't like there aren't literally hundreds of seeds in the soil already. Just walk away, and leave the vine (and therefore the urushiol) undisturbed. The urushiol will eventually break down, but it takes five years or so for that to happen. Until then, leaving it where it is is probably the safest option.

Do walk past it later to notice the difference. Being able to see the results before and after (such as in the picture below) can be very encouraging. Encouragement is important.

