### SECOND OBJECTIVE: BREAKING UP STRONGHOLDS

I define a stronghold as an area that is largely if not exclusively populated with poison ivy. This is usually right around a reproducing vine (that hopefully you have just found and killed.) There are enough plants in this area that one will inevitably find a tree or other climbing surface and generate another reproducing vine. You've got some time before this happens, so don't worry about breaking up strongholds until you are reasonably sure that you have eliminated all the reproducing vines.

Keep in mind the long game. You will not be able to eliminate a stronghold in one year, since whatever damage you inflict this year will not prevent it from growing back next year. Patience. You can't win instantly, but you can make substantial progress each year. I use chemical herbicides here. Be sure to read carefully the manufacturer's directions and follow them. Keep in mind, though: you're not going to be able to get them all. Focus on trying to kill the largest plants. Obviously try to get as many as possible, but don't spread it too thin. It would be better to kill some of the plants than just to annoy them all but not kill any of them.

One thing though: aim properly and carefully. It is very important that you miss any plants that are not poison ivy. You want any other plants in the area to thrive; these plants are your allies, since they will be stealing sunlight and ground water from any poison ivy plants in the area. Keep in mind that if you were to kill all the plants in that area then since poison ivy is a fierce competitor it will tend to grow back quicker than anything else does. Say to yourself as you are spraying, "The weed of my weed is my crop." (That a modified version of an old Arab saying that goes, "The enemy of my enemy is my friend". My version definitely works here; I’m not too sure of the old Arab saying. I have enemies, and they don't think too much of me. Those enemies also have enemies, but they don't think too much of me either. In fact, even they have enemies, and even they don't take too kindly to me. Okay, maybe there's a reason I'm in a room by myself typing about making war on plants instead of being off at a party somewhere.) It's worth noticing what the good competitors against poison ivy are in your area. In my area, the best is usually the Virginia creeper. It looks a lot like poison ivy, but it has five leaves instead of three. And no urushiol. It is an important enough competitor that it gets included in one version of the old saying: "Leave of three, let them bee; leaves of five, let them thrive." In any case, you need to be careful spraying around any Virginia creeper you see, even if it means leaving some poison ivy unsprayed. If you can get the Virginia creeper to crowd out the poison ivy, your job will be much easier.

(Oh, and remember what I said about not killing any plants other than poison ivy? I take that back in the case of kudzu. Kudzu is just evil. It's kind of like the plant equivalent of the Weeping Angels from Dr. Who. Kill it wherever you can anyway.)

Do what damage you can, then move on. Remember the location of this stronghold. Next spring, try to catch it right when the first shoots start coming up. Spray those carefully, then if possible come back and spray in a few weeks. Don't overspray, though; you want to be careful to protect the other plants as much as possible.

During the entire first year, it may seem like an impossible task. Second year may still seem daunting, but it at least seems possible. After the third year, the task becomes manageable. You will still have some established plants and seedlings to deal with, but poison ivy will now no longer be the dominant plant in that area. Congratulations, you've broken the stronghold.

