### A BRIEF ASIDE ABOUT AN UNPOPULAR TOPIC

Once you get good at spotting poison ivy, it starts to become difficult not to spot poison ivy. You'll start seeing it everywhere. With that knowledge comes a temptation...

I face that temptation just about every day at my house. You see, on the other side of the street is a huge poison ivy vine growing in a wooded area. It is spreading seeds all throughout the neighborhood, I'm sure. When I find a seedling on my property, it is hard not to imagine it came from that one blasted vine. I would be overjoyed to be given the opportunity to kill it. My problem is that it is not on my property. I know most of the neighbors, but I don't know the owner of that particular piece of property. I don't have permission to be on that land; still less do I have permission to kill anything on it. But then again, who'd know it was me? Our street is not heavily trafficked, so the chances that anyone would spot me are minimal. I could make it look like an accident. Surely I would be making the world a better place by just doing what I'm tempted to do. More than likely, the owner wouldn't mind. The ends justify the means, right? (Or so I'm tempted to tell myself).

And so we encounter a topic that few like to talk about: authority. (There are a few people that go on and on about it; I try to avoid them whenever possible.) I kill poison ivy on my land because I have the authority as property owner to do so. Poison ivy is not an endangered species with legal protection. I am not using radioactive isotopes to kill poison ivy (which would be illegal I'm sure). Any other legitimate authority over me is okay with my poison ivy killing activities. When I go on someone else's property to kill poison ivy, it is always with their permission and according to their directives. Anything else would entail trespassing or worse. So I don't do it.

Once you decide you have the authority to just do whatever you think is for the greater good for others, it is hard to stop. Once you decide you know what is best for others so that you can override their decisions and their wishes, you're well on your way to becoming a terrible person. You tell yourself that you can break the rules just this once, but domination and defiance are powerfully addictive. Far better to learn to live by the rules and under legitimate authority, even if it means having to kill poison ivy seedlings on your own property once a year.

I learned this lesson early from my dad. I noticed a poison ivy plant on a tree in a house in our neighborhood, and asked if he was going to kill it. He replied that it wasn't his vine. He pointed out that the person who owned that property might like it. That made no sense to me. So he pointed out that some people might think that the shiny leaves are pretty. I remember dropping the subject at that point, but I said to myself, "Some people are into the oddest things." Many decades later I start to see the sense of that point of view. As I've been getting older, I more and more can appreciate the sheer beauty of the sound of the phrase "Get off my lawn." Somehow nothing says "get off my lawn" quite as dramatically as a lawn full of poison ivy plants. (Okay, there's a plant that is found in the Mario video games that might say it better. I want some of those on my lawn someday.) There's a reason that people grow rose bushes and holly bushes around the windows of their house. I'm not sure that's always nice, but it is their prerogative. My dad didn't explain it to me in those terms back then, but I'm sure he thought it. So I'm thankful that I get to walk past someone else's poison ivy plant on a regular basis. It gives me the opportunity over and over again to choose not to become a monster. I trust you will make wise choices as well when faced with these sort of temptations.

(Okay, here's where I should admit that I don't always live up to my own convictions. This past year I spotted a kudzu vine growing up a tree a few feet away from the neighbor's poison ivy vine I just described. I ripped it down with a pole saw. My pole saw was long enough so that I never trespassed on the neighbor's property. Still, I did it. Maybe I am becoming a monster. Have to watch that.)

