### ONCE YOU HAVE YOUR OWN POISON IVY PROBLEM UNDER CONTROL

Once your battle against poison ivy has reached the "just killing the new seedling" stage, you will have time on your hands and a lot of good experience. Consider putting it to good use. I did.

For a few years, I have been taking on the task of controlling the poison ivy problem at a couple of Christian camps in my area. These are camps that are doing good in our community; they offer a message of hope to kids along with a lot of good outdoor fun. I care passionately that kids be able to enjoy their time there without getting a rash that sucks all the fun out of their experience. I am not in a position to help these camps out in other ways, so I just try to make this one problem go away so they can focus on more important things.

I've also helped some other individuals and families with their poison ivy problem. It's fun to be generous; it's good for you when you can help out others.

I note that I always offer my services for free. Not that I'm averse to making money and not that I doubt that this is legitimate work. I just note that my not excepting money or equivalent compensation means that I'm safe from a four-letter word that strikes fear in the hearts of otherwise bold men and women nationwide. What word? (Brace yourself) OHSA! That's right; by not performing this service for money I can prevent it from being an occupation. My activities here are not under the jurisdiction of the Occupational Health and Safety Administration. I have no idea of how they would regulate me if I was actually earning a paycheck doing this, but I don't have to worry about that. Just turn around and walk away, OHSA; you have no power here.

(Note that I'm a U.S. citizen, so I worry about OSHA. How Canada deals with this is beyond my imagination. You might want to find out if you sing "Oh Canada" at sports events.)

There’s another reason I offer my services for free: If I were doing this for money, the person paying me would have a legitimate authority to interfere with the way I do it. I know how to do what I do, and I know how to minimize the risk to myself. I don’t want to have to test out someone else’s ideas. I’m open to suggestions, but I really don’t want to have to put myself at risk. By doing it as a favor, I can do it my way as long as I work within their boundaries and give a good account of my activities to them. (In case you haven’t noticed, this is also why I am offering you this document for free: I don’t want to have to be called into account for the way I write. I’m writing for free, so I can say whatever I want. I think tapioca pudding is abominable. You probably didn’t need to know that, but I’m saying it anyway so there. You can’t complain you’re not getting your money’s worth.)

There are rewards more important than monetary rewards, and killing poison ivy can offer that in a particularly special way. I quote the words of Jesus from Matthew 6:3-4 (NIV) "But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, so that your giving may be in secret. Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you." So consider: by killing a reproducing vine you are preventing birds from eating those berries and carrying those seeds who knows where. Poison ivy plants that otherwise would be planted will not in fact be planted. Patches of poison ivy that otherwise might give rashes won't be there to spread. The people who would otherwise have gotten poison ivy won't realize what they have been spared from because of your gift to them. (They might not be needy in the traditional sense, but I'm thinking that a person with a poison ivy rash has a very definite need regardless of their economic or social status). Left hand has no idea what the right hand just did, so secrecy is preserved. This gift I offer ultimately to my Heavenly Father, who sees what might otherwise have been. It makes me happy knowing that He sees it.

Admittedly, my activity makes me happy for another reason too:
I don't like birds.
(Just kidding.)

